=begin pod

=head1 NAME

DateTime::Julian - Provides routines to use astronomical Julian dates (sometimes called
I<Julian day numbers>)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=begin code :lang<raku>

use DateTime::Julian;
my $jd = nnnn.nnnn; # Julian date for some event
my $utc = DateTime::Julian.new: :juliandate($jd);
say $utc.j2000; # Julian date for epoch J2000
say $utc.j1900; # Julian date for epoch J1900
say $utc.jcent;
say $utc.mjd;   # Modified Julian date
my $lon = -86.234; # local observer's longitude;
# Get the local sidereal time for the UTC at the current Julian date
my $lst = $utc.lst: :$lon; 
=end code

=head1 DateTime::Julian

Module B<DateTime::Julian> defines a class (inherited from a Raku I<DateTime> class) that
is usually instantiated from a I<Julian date>, although it can
also be instantiated by any of the methods described in
the Raku documentation for a I<DateTime> class;

Following are some pertinent definitions from Wikipedia topic
[I<Julian day>](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_day):

=item1 The B<Julian day> is the continuous count of the days since 
the beginning of the Julian period, and is used primarily
by astronomers....

=item1 The B<Julian day number> (JDN) is the integer assigned to
a whole solar day count starting from noon Universal time, with Julian
day number 0 assigned to the day starting at noon on Monday, January 1, 4713 BC,
proleptic [Note 1] Julian calendar (November 24, 4714 BC, in the proleptic Gregorian calendar),
a date at which three multi-year cycles started (which are: indiction, Solar,
and Lunar cycles) and which preceded any dates in recorded history. For example,
the Julian day number for the day starting at 12:00 UT (noon) on January 1, 2000,
was B<2451545>.

=item1 The B<Julian date> (JD) of any instant is the Julian day number plus the fraction 
of a day since the preceding noon in Universal Time. Julian dates are
expressed as a Julian day number with a decimal fraction added.
For example, the Julian date for 00:30:00.0 UT January 1, 2013,
is B<2456293.520833>.

The following methods and routines were developed from several sources
including those shown in the L<References|#References>. The author
of Ref. 3 has been very helpful with this author's questions
about astronomy, and much of his code has been ported to Raku
for this module. 

The main purpose of this module is to simplify
time and handling for this author who still finds Julian dates
to be somewhat mysterious, but absolutely necessary
for dealing with astronomy and predicting object positions, especially
the Sun and Moon, for local observation and producing astronomical
almanacs.

=head2 Class DateTime::Julian methods

=head2 DateTime::Julian routines

=head1 Notes

1. A I<proleptic calendar>, according to Wikipedia, "is a calendar that is applied to dates before its introduction."

=head1 References

1. I<Astronomy on the Personal Computer>, Oliver Montenbruck and Thomas Pfleger, Springer, 2000.

2. I<Celestial Calculations: A Gentle Introduction to Computational Astronomy>, J. L. Lawrence, The MIT Press, 2019.

3. I<Astro::Montenbruck>, Sergey Krushinsky, CPAN.

=head1 AUTHOR

Tom Browder <tbrowder@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright E<0x00a9> 2021 Tom Browder

=head1 Notes

1. A I<proleptic calendar>, according to Wikipedia, "is a calendar that is applied to dates before its introduction."

=head1 References

1. I<Astronomy on the Personal Computer>, Oliver Montenbruck and Thomas Pfleger, Springer, 2000.

2. I<Celestial Calculations: A Gentle Introduction to Computational Astronomy>, J. L. Lawrence, The MIT Press, 2019.

3. I<Astro::Montenbruck>, Sergey Krushinsky, CPAN.

=head1 AUTHOR

Tom Browder <tbrowder@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright E<0x00a9> 2021 Tom Browder

This library is free software; you can redistribute it or modify it under the Artistic License 2.0.

=end pod
